Added preprocessing scripts for DaNews (#117)
centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models: docs/danews.md

# DaNews

*Version*: 1.0.0

*Homepage*: https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models

*license*: Not publicly available.

---

DaNews consist of articles collected from the [Infomedia](https://infomedia.dk) and 
consists of 25874862 articles across 1362 news sources. DaNews include

> articles from the period 01/12/2000 to  30/04/2021.

Author: Change transferred to `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

> DaNews have been filters out quality using a series of heuristic filters and removing repitious texts. 

Author: transferred to `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

> Following the filtering DaNews is deduplicated to remove exact and near-duplicates. For more on data cleaning

Author: changed in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

see post processing.

> DaNews includes a total of 9296359450 tokens of which 8667100588 (0.93%) are left after filtering.

Author: changed to 9.29 billions in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

> ## Datasheet:

Author: changed in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

> ### Motivation:

Author: changed in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

**For what purpose was the dataset created? Who created the dataset? Who funded the creation of the dataset?**

The dataset was created for pre-training Danish language models by a team of researchers at Center for Humanities
Computing Aarhus (CHCAA) using a codebase jointly developed with partners from industry (e.g. KMD, Ekstra Bladet) and other
research institutions (e.g. Briston University, Alexandra Institute). For more on collaborators on this project see
the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models

> ).

Author: changed in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`. I have removed the Alexandra institute affiliation but can add it back in if you wish.

**Any other comments?**
No.

## Composition
**What do the instances that comprise the dataset represent (e.g., documents, photos, people, countries)?**

All instances of the dataset are Danish articles depending on the source these are derived from tabloid media or 
mainstream news. 

**How many instances are there in total (of each type, if appropriate)?**

> The dataset consist of 25874862 documents where 1048815 (0.04%) are left after filtering. 

Author: changed in `docs/datasheet/danews.md`

**Does the dataset contain all possible instances or is it a sample (not necessarily random) of instances from a larger set?**
Prior to filtering this dataset contains all instances of new articles from the given period across the sources.

**If the dataset is a sample from a larger set, what was the sampling strategy?**

> The dataset is not a sample, however it is filtered as described in post processing.

Author: Made this distinction clear

**Who was involved in the data collection process?**
A team of researchers at Center for Humanities

> Computing Aarhus (CHCAA) recieved this dataset in a collaboration with Infomedia.

Author: I have specified this further.

**Over what timeframe was the data collected?**

> The dataset include articles from the period 01/12/2000 to  30/04/2021.

Author: Updated in datasheet version

**Were any ethical review processes conducted?**
No.

## Preprocessing/cleaning/labeling

**Was any preprocessing/Cleaning/Labeling of the data done 
(e.g., discretization or bucketing, tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, 
SIFT feature extraction, removal of instances, processing of missing values)?**

> We filter documents that are not in Danish. We remove low-quality text and deduplicate documents based on their 
> document-level n-gram similarity. The full pre-processing details are given in the post processing section.

Reviewer: I specified the language detection algorithm. I'm not sure if that's the one we're using, so feel free to correct if necessary.
```suggestion
We removed non-Danish documents, according to the FastText language detection algorithm. We also remove low-quality text and deduplicate documents based on their 
document-level n-gram similarity. The full pre-processing details are given in the post processing section.
```

Author: We actually don't filter these documents for language (will fix this)

**Is the software used to preprocess/clean/label the instances available?**
Yes, the script are avaiable [here](https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models/tree/main/src/application/danews). 

> Which used version 0.0.1 of the [dfm package](https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script used version 0.0.1 of the [dfm package](https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models). 
```

Author: added to datasheet

## Uses
**Has the dataset been used for any tasks already?**
Yes, the dataset has been used to pre-train Danish language models.

> Parts of the dataset have also been used in
> Baglini, R. B., Nielbo, K. L., Hæstrup, F., Enevoldsen, K., Vahlstrup, P. B., & Roepstorff, A. (2021, June 2). When no news is bad news: Detection of negative events from news media content. https://2021.dhbenelux.org/
> Nielbo, K. L., Baglini, R. B., Vahlstrup, P. B., Enevoldsen, K. C., Bechmann, A., & Roepstorff, A. (2021, January). News information decoupling: An information signature of catastrophes in legacy news media. https://eadh2020-2021.org/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parts of the dataset have also been used in [3] and [4].
```

**Is there a repository that links to any or all papers or systems that use the dataset?**
No.

**What (other) tasks could the dataset be used for?**
The scale of the dataset makes it suitable for NLP tasks such as language modelling. Similarly, the structure

> of the articles make it a suitable dataset for training text-summerization models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the articles makes it a suitable dataset for training text summarisation models.
```

**Is there anything about the composition of the dataset or the way it was collected and preprocessed/cleaned/labeled that might impact future uses?**

> 
> This dataset is static and thus does not evolve over time with the language, thus will become increasingly outdated over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dataset is static and thus does not evolve over time with the language. A consequence of this is that it will become increasingly outdated over time.
```

Author: updated in datasheet

**Are there tasks for which the dataset should not be used?**

> This dataset contains Danish articles and thus should not be used for Danish language task.

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense. Do you mean that it shouldn't be used for *non-*Danish tasks?

> As the writers of the content is predominantly journalists, it reflect a certain social group which is unlikely to reflect Danish language as a whole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the writers of the content are predominantly journalists, it reflects a certain writing style which is unlikely to reflect Danish language as a whole.
```

## Distribution
**Will the dataset be distributed to third parties outside of the entity (e.g., company, institution, organization) on behalf of which the dataset was created?**
No.

# Post processing

> DaNews have been filtered for quality using a series of heuristic filters and removing repitious texts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DaNews has been filtered using a series of heuristic filters as well as removing repetitious texts. 
```

Author: corrected

> Following the filtering DaNews is deduplicated to remove exact and near-duplicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the filtering, DaNews is deduplicated to remove exact and near-duplicates.
```

Author: corrected

> A total of 2338728 (0.09%) were considered low quality and a 
> total of 1048815 (0.04%) documents were considered duplicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A total of 2,338,728 (9%) were considered low quality and a 
total of 1,048,815 (4%) documents were considered duplicates.
```

Author: changed in datasheet

## Quality Filter:

> For the quality filtering DaNews applies a filter akin to [2] which filters text which does not:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the quality filtering, DaNews applies a filter akin to [2] which filters text which does not:
```

Author: corrected

- Contain at least 2 Danish stopwords. For the stopword list we use the one used in SpaCy v.3.1.4.
- Have mean word length between 3-10.

> - Have a token length between 50-100 000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have a token length between 50 and 100,000.
```

Author: corrected

> - Have a less than 5 000 000 characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have less than 5,000,000 characters.
```

Author: corrected

> - Have a less than 60% words containing an alphabetic character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have less than 60% words containing an alphabetic character.
```

Author: corrected

- Have a symbol to word ratio lower than 10% for hashtags an ellipsis.
- Have less than 90% of lines starting with a bullet point.
- have less than 30% of lines ending with an ellipsis.

> - Have low high degree of repitiuous text:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have low high degree of repetitious text.
```

Author: corrected

>   - Less than 20% duplicate lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Have less than 20% duplicate lines.
```

Author: fixed. Is actually also 20% of character contained within duplicate lines.

>   - Less than 20% duplicate paragraphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Have less than 20% duplicate paragraphs.
```

Author: fixed

  - Where the top 2-4 grams constitute less than 20%, 18%, 16%, respectively, of the text. 
  - Where the duplicate 5-10 grams constitute less than 25%, 24%, 23%, 22%, 21%, 20% of the text, respectively.

## Deduplication

> The deduplication removed all documents with a 13-gram similarity higher than 80% following the MinHash algorithm [1] using 128 permutation.

Reviewer: Did we end up using 128? I thought this was reduced even further?
```suggestion
The deduplication removed all documents with a 13-gram similarity higher than 80% following the MinHash algorithm [1] using 128 permutations.
```

Author: corrected

The MinHash algorithm is a probabilistic data structure for approximating the Jaccard similarity between two sets.

References:

- [1] Broder, Andrei Z. "On the resemblance and containment of documents."
        Proceedings. Compression and Complexity of SEQUENCES 1997
        (Cat. No. 97TB100171). IEEE, 1997.
- [2] Rae, J. W., Borgeaud, S., Cai, T., Millican, K., Hoffmann, J., Song, F.,
        Aslanides, J., Henderson, S., Ring, R., Young, S., Rutherford, E., Hennigan,
        T., Menick, J., Cassirer, A., Powell, R., Driessche, G. van den, Hendricks,
        L. A., Rauh, M., Huang, P.-S., … Irving, G. (2021).
        Scaling Language Models: Methods, Analysis & Insights from Training Gopher.
        https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446v2

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [3] Baglini, R. B., Nielbo, K. L., Hæstrup, F., Enevoldsen, K., Vahlstrup, P. B., & Roepstorff, A. (2021, June 2). When no news is bad news: Detection of negative events from news media content. https://2021.dhbenelux.org/
- [4] Nielbo, K. L., Baglini, R. B., Vahlstrup, P. B., Enevoldsen, K. C., Bechmann, A., & Roepstorff, A. (2021, January). News information decoupling: An information signature of catastrophes in legacy news media. https://eadh2020-2021.org/

```

> ### Citation
> If you wish to cite this work please see our GitHub page for an up to date citation: https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Citation
If you wish to cite this work then please see our [GitHub page](https://github.com/centre-for-humanities-computing/danish-foundation-models) for an up to date citation.
```
